# How to Hear God: A Simple Guide for Normal People
__By: Peter Greig and John Mark Comer__
## Lessons Learned:
- The Bible says that you were created to enjoy a real, conversational relationship with God. Hearing his voice is therefore the most natural thing in the world.
- Nothing can replace, and nothing matters more, than a personal encounter with Jesus.
- We learn most effectively through either seeing (visual processing), hearing (auditory processing), or doing (kinesthetic processing).
- Certain personality types, it seems, simply find it harder to hear God’s voice than others.
- But God is not in a hurry, and he is also—as we see in these stories—inclined to speak to those who show themselves truly hungry.
- “You will seek me and find me,” he says, “when you seek me with all your heart” (Jer. 29:13). God does not say here, “You will inevitably find me the moment you seek me.” Rather, he promises to be found “when you seek me with all your heart.” There is something about the posture of my praying and the wholeheartedness of my seeking—the determination, desperation, and desire—that moves the heart and attracts the attention of God. Eventually.
- Your chosen moment might be a particular journey alone in the car with the music playing loud, or a serene walk in the country with your earphones in, or a regular time of physical exercise accompanied by praise.
- First, it shows that the resurrected Jesus continues to look to the Bible for authority.
- Second, on the road to Emmaus Jesus interprets the Scriptures in a radical new way, explaining “what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself ” (v. 27, italics mine). In other words, he took the lens of his own life, death, and resurrection and reviewed the entire Bible through its unique perspective.
- Third, in this story we see that when the Bible is interpreted in this way—in the light of Jesus, inspired by the Holy Spirit—it has a remarkable power to speak directly and personally into our lives.
- an extraordinary experience and a personal encounter are insufficient unless accompanied by a biblical explanation.
- There are two particular skills that every single Christian needs to develop, therefore, in order to hear God in and through holy Scripture. First, we must learn to read the Bible with our heads, in order to understand what is actually, objectively, being said. And second, we must learn to read it with our hearts, in order to experience God’s voice through its pages.
- I would encourage you, as someone serious about hearing God, to invest in a study Bible, a few commentaries,19 and an introduction to hermeneutics, such as the classic How to Read the Bible for All Its Worth by Gordon Fee and Douglas Stewart.20
- among those who study the Bible at least four times a week, there is a dramatic inflection point, a sharp uplift in their mental and spiritual well-being. In fact, these regular Bible readers are 30 percent less likely to feel lonely, 32 percent less prone to anger issues, 60 percent less likely to report feelings of spiritual stagnation, and 228 percent more likely to be active in sharing their faith.35
- Auditory processors: Instead of just reading the words on the page, you may find it helpful to listen to the Bible, either by reading it aloud to yourself or with one of the excellent audio versions available online.
- Visual processors: You may well find it helpful to deface your Bible! Write in its margins. Highlight the text in different colors. Make the pages a feast for the eye. Similarly, you could try doodling a meditation by writing out a verse, perhaps in your journal, and then drawing images, underlining, going on bunny trails.
- Active processors: You may well engage powerfully with the Bible by putting its words into practice.
- how we listen is sometimes (always?) more important than what is said.
- P.R.A.Y. Guigo II Action Pause - Quietly prepare your heart Read & Reflect lectio and meditatio Slowly read, rejoice, reflect, and repeat Ask oratio Turn your reflections into prayer Yield contemplatio Enjoy the presence of God
- Stillness, especially in a culture as frenzied as ours, amounts to nothing less than a counterintuitive act of defiant trust in the sovereignty of God. The deceptively simple act of pausing, even just for a few minutes each day, can be a form of peace-making with our own battle-weary souls.
- Slowing down, breathing deeply, relaxing physically, and inviting the Holy Spirit to come.
- The aim of your first reading is to gain an overview of the passage before returning a second time to go deeper.
- What buried treasure might be awaiting my discovery if I would always open my Bible convinced that something infinitely precious is in there just for me and that, if I search long enough and carefully enough, I will surely find it eventually? “When you meditate,” said Archbishop François Fénelon, “imagine that Jesus Christ in person is about to talk to you about the most important thing in the world. Give him your complete attention.”8
- Because you “set the table” in your first reading, it’s finally time to feast! On this second reading you will take a little longer and go a little deeper, seeking to apply “diligent attention and reflection” to the text. “You should meditate,” said Luther, “so that you may see what the Holy Spirit means.”
- THREE KEYS TO MEDITATION
    - Meditation Means Embracing Interruption
        - When it comes to biblical meditation, interruptions can become invitations from the Holy Spirit.
    - Meditation Means Exercising Intuition
    - Meditation Means Engaging Imagination
- Prayer was never meant to be a monologue; it was meant to be a dialogue. Think of Scripture as God’s part of the script; prayer is our part. Scripture is God’s way of initiating a conversation; prayer is our response. The paradigm shift happens when you realize that the Bible wasn’t meant to be read through; the Bible was meant to be prayed through. And if you pray through it, you will never run out of things to talk about.18
- Having slowly, prayerfully read the Scriptures, you only need to wait—don’t rush off. Enjoy the moment. There’s nothing to say or do. Simply sit quietly for a few minutes, reflecting on what you’ve just read and what God has just said.
- For Further Reflection Lectio 365—a daily devotional app based around the lectio divina, which I cowrite and cohost with a team from 24-7 Prayer. The Lectio Divina Course from www.prayercourse.org. David G. Benner, Opening to God: Lectio Divina and Life as Prayer (Downers Grove, IL: IVP, 2010). Michael Casey, Sacred Reading: The Ancient Art of Lectio Divina (London: HarperCollins, 1996).
- So the primary focus of prophecy is others, and the primary purpose of prophecy is their strengthening, encouraging, comfort, and edification.
- “I began to discover,” he says, with his eyes twinkling, “that in everything God has a voice.” I would go about my day talking to him, asking, “What are you saying in this situation? Where are you at work in this place? What was that encounter all about?”
- “Does it sound like Jesus?” A simple, memorable rule of thumb is therefore to apply the ABC filter: • Affirming: Does this word fulfil the criteria of 1 Corinthians 14, by being strengthening, encouraging, comforting, edifying, and upbuilding? • Biblical: Is this word consistent with the broad teaching and witness of Scripture (not just a specific verse taken out of context—see chapter 2)? • Christlike: Is this word consistent with the character, mission, and message of Jesus?
- Most of the time we miss the voice of God not because it’s too strange but because it’s too familiar. He sounds like a song on the radio, a fleeting thought, the old man next door. The God of the universe is rarely weird.
- We expect him to flash around his all-access pass, to kick down the door of our lives, but instead he waits for us to invite him into our boat or our house or our heart.
- By honoring the “little solitudes” of each day with our undivided attention, refusing to reach for our phones the moment we find ourselves alone, we can easily turn these in-between times into oases of stillness before God. And, collectively, these little moments probably add up to at least an hour of your day!
- There is hardly ever a complete silence in our soul. God is whispering to us well-nigh incessantly. Whenever the sounds of the world die out in the soul, or sink low, then we hear these whisperings of God. —
- Reflect on the details of the day that’s gone, replaying it like a film in your head, particularly noticing the moments that provoked strong emotions or unexpected behaviors. • Rejoice in the evidence of God’s presence, not just in the day’s obvious blessings but also savoring its subtler signs of his kindness: a good meal, a meaningful conversation, etc. • Repent of the ways in which you’ve sinned in thought, word, and deed, paying particular heed to the subtler, more insidious attitudes you might otherwise brush under the carpet. • Res(e)t Having identified the good, the bad, and the ugly in your day, rejoicing and repenting accordingly, ask the Lord to grant you rest (inspiring your dreams!) and giving you a reset for a fresh start tomorrow.
- “I love to think of nature as unlimited broadcasting stations,” he wrote, “through which God speaks to us every day, every hour and every moment of our lives, if we will only tune in.”20
- Listening and following. That’s it. All the vast libraries of theological thought, millennia of sermons, and the relentless chatter of Christendom can be condensed down into just four surprisingly simple words: listen and follow Jesus.
- It is Jesus who comes to us covertly, disguised in the ordinary, interrupting our conversations on the Emmaus road. It is his presence that realigns our thinking, his insights that bring the Scriptures to life. He enters our homes before we’ve had a chance to tidy them, sits down at our meal tables, half uninvited, and breaks our hearts by breaking bread.

