# Redeeming Your Time: 7 Biblical Principles for Being Purposeful, Present, and Wildly Productive
__By: Jordan Raynor__
## Lessons Learned:
- As Christians, our ultimate source of peace—our ultimate solution to being swamped—is found in the God-man sleeping through the storm. As the apostle Paul said in Ephesians 2:14, “[Jesus] himself is our peace.”
- Jen Wilkin, put it this way: “We are commanded to be time redeemers, those who reclaim our time from useless pursuits and employ it to the glory of God.”
- Genesis 2:15: “The Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it.” The Hebrew word for “work” here is avodah, which is also translated to mean “worship” in our Bibles.17 Work existed pre-sin. Work was good. Work was more than good—work was worship.
- Our work matters today because it is a means of glorifying God and loving our neighbors as ourselves (see Matthew 22:39). But our work also matters for eternity because God can use it to build his kingdom. And because God alone will finish that work and ultimately bring heaven to earth, we can embrace this freeing truth today: God doesn’t need you or me to finish our to-do lists. If the things on our to-do lists are on God’s to-do list, he will complete them with or without us.
- God loves us no matter how productive or unproductive we are in this life. And ironically, it’s that truth that leads us to be wildly productive. Why? Because working to earn someone’s favor is exhausting, but working in response to unconditional favor is intoxicating. For Christians, the key to being wildly productive is realizing that we don’t need to be productive.33 Once we realize that God accepts us no matter how many good things we do, we want to be productive for his agenda as a loving act of worship.
- PRINCIPLE #1 START WITH THE WORD To redeem our time in the model of our Redeemer, we must first know the Author of time, his purposes for the world, and what he has called us to do with the time he has given us.
    - To redeem our time for God’s purposes, we need to develop the habit of communing with him through the study of his Word on a daily basis.
    - Jesus prioritized time with his Father above everything else,
    - It begins by reading a passage of Scripture (I usually read one chapter along with a commentary by Timothy Keller or N. T. Wright). Then we respond to the text by writing out: Instruction (what the passage is commanding you to do) Praise (what the passage leads you to praise God for) Confession (where you have fallen short of the passage’s instruction) Petition (for God’s grace in helping you live out the commands of the passage)44
    - “Even though they hadn’t finished the task or made any palpable progress, the simple act of making a plan had cleared their minds and eliminated the Zeigarnik effect.”4 What’s my point? Baumeister explained: If…you’ve got [a ton of] items on your to-do list, the Zeigarnik effect could leave you leaping from task to task, and it won’t be sedated by vague good intentions. If you’ve got a memo that has to be read before a meeting Thursday morning, the unconscious wants to know exactly what needs to be done next, and under what circumstances. But once you make that plan…you can relax. You don’t have to finish the job right away. You’ve still got [a ton of] things on the to-do list, but for the moment…the water is calm.
    - The Zeigarnik effect is brought on by things we know we need to do but that we’ve failed to get out of our heads.
    - Jesus has told us, plain and simple, “Let your ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes,’ and your ‘No,’ ‘No.’ For whatever is more than these is from the evil one” (Matthew 5:37, NKJV).
- PRINCIPLE #2 LET YOUR YES BE YES To redeem our time in the model of our Redeemer, we must ensure that our yes is yes from the smallest to the biggest commitments we make.
    - we don’t have to actually close our open loops in order for our brains to let them go; we simply have to place them in trusted systems outside our minds. As Dr. Levitin explained, “Writing [open loops] down gives both implicit and explicit permission to [your brain] to let them go, to relax its neural circuits so that we can focus on something else.”15
    - If you have an overwhelming number of items on your Inbox List, consider asking the more rigorous version of this question: “Would anything happen if I never completed this?”
    - And that was it. Truly. Sounds simple? It is. And anyone can do it, including you. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. once said, “You don’t have to see the whole staircase, just take the first step.”23 That’s what defining the next action for each of your projects is all about and why this question is so important.
    - Like King, you and I have a moral obligation to seek out solitude as we try to redeem our time.
    - FIVE WAYS NOISE LIMITS OUR ABILITY TO REDEEM TIME 
        - #1: Noise Limits Our Ability to Think
        - #2: Noise Limits Our Ability to Be Creative
        - #3: Noise Limits Our Ability to Cultivate Depth
        - #4: Noise Limits Our Ability to Be at Peace
            - Philippians 4:6–8: Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God. And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus. Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable—if anything is excellent or praiseworthy—think about such things.
        - #5: Noise Limits Our Ability to Listen to God’s Voice
    - In Psalm 46:10, our Father invites us to “be still, and know that [he is] God.” Commenting on this verse, Emily P. Freeman said, There’s a reason why God invites us to be still first: the stillness makes way for the knowing….Stillness is to my soul as decluttering is to my home. Silence and stillness are how I sift through the day’s input. The silence serves as a colander, helping me discern what I need to hold on to and allowing what I don’t need to fall gently away, making space to access courage and creativity, quieting to hear the voice of God.26 That’s it. Silence, stillness, solitude, reflection—that’s the difference between hearing God’s Word and listening to his voice.
- PRINCIPLE #3 DISSENT FROM THE KINGDOM OF NOISE To redeem our time in the model of our Redeemer, we must fight to block out noise and create room for silence, stillness, and reflection.
    - The next time you find yourself waiting for the elevator at work, resist the urge to unlock your phone. The next time you finish reading a chapter of a book five minutes before your kids are expected home, don’t turn the page. The next time you hop in your car to run a ten-minute errand, don’t press play on that podcast episode (yes, even if it’s mine). As we’ve seen, boredom doesn’t come naturally for us in the twenty-first century, so we have to intentionally develop the skill of being bored. Start small by refusing to fill the cracks and crevices of your day with noise.
    - “writing what you actually think.” When I am in need of clarity, nothing does the trick better than writing out my thoughts in full prose—not bullet points, but full-on sentences.
    - Author Julia Cameron said that journaling is the equivalent of spiritual “windshield wipers.”57 I think that’s right. Are you having trouble hearing your own thoughts or the voice of God? Turn down the noise, pick up a pen (or laptop), and start writing.
- PRINCIPLE #4 PRIORITIZE YOUR YESES To redeem our time in the model of our Redeemer, we must decide what matters most and allow those choices to prioritize our commitments.
    - Here’s a map of where we’re going and the questions we will be answering as we step out onto each floor: 5th Floor: Mission (Why do you exist?) 4th Floor: Callings (Which roles will you choose to carry out your mission?) 3rd Floor: Long-Term Goals (What do you want for each of your callings?) 2nd Floor: Quarterly Goals (How will you make progress toward your long-term goals in the next three months?) 1st Floor: Projects and Actions (What are the items on your to-do list that will help you accomplish your quarterly goals?) Basement: Posteriorities (What must you avoid at all costs to accomplish your quarterly goals?)*
    - Pastor and author Rick Warren put it this way in The Purpose Driven Life: The search for the purpose of life has puzzled people for thousands of years. That’s because we typically begin at the wrong starting point—ourselves…. Contrary to what many popular books, movies, and seminars tell you, you won’t discover your life’s meaning by looking within yourself….You didn’t create yourself, so there is no way you can tell yourself what you were created for!14
    - Corinthians 10:31, where Paul said that in “whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God.” The mission of your life is to glorify God. Period. Full stop.
    - 90 percent of more than a thousand studies have shown that productivity is significantly enhanced by articulating what we want in the form of “well-defined, challenging goals.”
    - FIVE REASONS TO SET MORE EPIC GOALS 
        - #1: God Has the Power to Do “Immeasurably More” Than We Can Imagine
            - Ephesians 3:20 makes this clear: “[God]…is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to his power that is at work within us.” God’s power is at work within you, believer. Through the Holy Spirit, you have the Creator God dwelling inside you. And Jesus said that through the Spirit, we “will do even greater things” (John 14:12)
        - #2: Big Goals Are Easier to Achieve Than Small Goals
        - #3: Big Goals Make It Easier to Say No
        - #4: Big Goals Recruit Others to Your Cause
        - #5: You’re Unlikely to Fail Entirely
    - objectives and key results (or OKRs), made famous by Google, whose leaders credit the goal-setting framework with “changing the course of the company forever.”
    - According to John Doerr, the renowned venture capitalist who literally wrote the book on OKRs, “Objectives are significant, concrete, action oriented, and (ideally) inspirational.”27 They are what need to be achieved in a given period of time to move you closer to achieving your BHAGs. Key results are “specific and time-bound, aggressive yet realistic. Most of all, they are measurable and verifiable.”28 In the words of former Googler and Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer, “It’s not a key result unless it has a number.”29 Key results are how you will know if you have accomplished your objective. Objectives and key results combine to create this simple goal formula: “I will [objective] as measured by [key results].” In a given quarter, you should have one to five sets of objectives, each with one to five corresponding key results.*2
    - Because we believe God has given us work to do! We’re not here to just coast through life. We are here on a mission to glorify God by doing as much good for others as possible.
- PRINCIPLE #5 ACCEPT YOUR UNIPRESENCE To redeem our time in the model of our Redeemer, we must accept our unipresence and focus on one important thing at a time.
    - PRACTICE 1: TAKE CONTROL OF WHEN YOU CHECK MESSAGES
    - ninety minutes at a time.
    - there’s a cap on how long we can focus intensely at our desks. Most scientists believe this cap is four hours in a twenty-four-hour time period.
    - God has hardwired us to pulse every other hour in what are called ultradian cycles. Essentially, our brains move from higher to lower levels of alertness every ninety minutes. At the end of that ninety-minute cycle, our brains need a break. Ultradian cycles are the body’s way of demanding that we work for ninety minutes, rest for fifteen to thirty, and start all over again, repeating the cycle on a bi-hourly basis throughout the day.
    - “Sleep provides a nighttime theater in which your brain tests out and builds connections between vast stores of information,” Dr. Walker explained.25 “It is the difference between knowledge (retention of individual facts) and wisdom (knowing what they all mean when you fit them together).”
- PRINCIPLE #6 EMBRACE PRODUCTIVE REST To redeem our time in the model of our Redeemer, we must embrace the God-designed rhythms of rest that are counterintuitively productive for our goals and our souls.
- PRINCIPLE #7 ELIMINATE ALL HURRY To redeem our time in the model of our Redeemer, we must embrace productive busyness while ruthlessly eliminating hurry from our lives.
    - “You are satisfied with your day when there is a match between what you value and how you spent your time.”14 But the only way to consistently achieve that level of satisfaction is to budget time for the things you value before you are given the time to spend.
    - “The right routines [give] us the equivalent of an energy rebate. Instead of spending our limited supply of discipline on making the same decisions again and again, embedding our decisions into our routine allows us to channel that discipline toward some other essential activity.”
    - If during your daily review you’re still having a hard time discerning what’s most important on your to-do list, ask yourself one of my all-time favorite questions: Which problem, once solved, is going to make most of my other problems easier to solve or disappear entirely?
    - Four Questions to Ask Before Saying Yes to Favors 
        - QUESTION #1: AM I THE BEST PERSON TO SAY YES TO THIS REQUEST?
        - QUESTION #2: IS THIS THE MOST GENEROUS USE OF MY TIME?
        - QUESTION #3: WOULD I SAY YES TO A HUNDRED SIMILAR REQUESTS FOR MY TIME?
        - QUESTION #4: DO I HAVE ROOM IN MY TIME BUDGET TO SAY YES TO THIS FAVOR?
    - Four Questions to Ask Before Saying Yes to Opportunities 
        - QUESTION #1: IS THIS OPPORTUNITY ALIGNED WITH MY GOALS?
        - QUESTION #2: THIS IS A REALLY GREAT OPPORTUNITY…FOR WHAT?
        - QUESTION #3: AM I TRYING TO DO GOOD OR MAKE MYSELF LOOK GOOD?
        - QUESTION #4: WHAT WILL I SAY NO TO?
    - Decline: The second paragraph of this email unequivocally declines this person’s request for coffee by leveraging one of my favorite terms: “fully committed.”