# Kanban in Action
__By: Marcus Hammarberg__
## Lessons Learned:
- Work shouldn't be defined as "done" until it is in production and a customer can use it 
- You can't improve what you don't see
- Stop starting and start finishing. Limit your work in progress
- Use visual controls so no problems are hidden
- Queues help you manage handoffs. For example, you can split development into doing and done. Done for development is the same as ready for testing. The way to decide where queues should be placed depends on what the next step is. For example, not everything development finishes needs to go to QA, it could need to be reviewed by product or support
- User stories need to include the Why (benefit), the Who (role), and the What (feature). A couple of templates that could be used are: As a [role], I want [feature], so that [benefit]. Or In order to [benefit], as a [role] I want [feature]
- Some teams use avatars to limit the work in process for each person. For example, giving each person three avatars to put in play on the board is a visual and effective way to make sure no one takes on too much work. 
- Try not to keep blocked items in a separate column. Keeping the blocked item in its column keeps it in your face, affects your amount of WIP, and forces you to constantly have to consider it during standups
- Littles law says the more things you have going at the same time, the longer each thing will take. Cycle time = work in progress / throughput. 
- Too much WIP can lead to increased risks because you can’t address change fast enough, lower quality because you didn’t catch a bug and kept having to work with the buggy code, and people can feel less motivated that it takes so much time to get something into production. A lot of problems come from not being quick enough with the feedback from end users
- Work in progress too high, work idle. Work in progress too low, people idle
- You can set the work in progress limit to a sum of story points.
- Pay special attention to the limit on the bottle neck, make sure it is efficiently able to more things along. This is important for bottle necks that are a single person
- You can set a limit for the entire team in order to increase collaboration
- Flow is the process where things are done just in time and each step in the process adds value to the end user. Seven types of waste: 1) partially done work, 2) extra features that don't add value to the users, 3) relearning, 4) handoffs, 5) delays, 6) task/context switching, and 7) defects. 
- Sometimes waiting or idle time is alright because then we reduce overall time and maintain continuous flow of tasks.
- Kanban standups focus on the work rather than the people, which differs from scrum. 
- Classes of services are different categories that a work item could fall into and has special rules around it. Some examples are: fixed delivery date, expedite, intangible (important but not urgent work items), defects, and regular. 
- You could try a just in time planning session to bring in new work into the todo column. By setting an order point, for example when there are only 3 remaining tickets in todo column, you meet to talk through what should be done next. By the time you finally meet, you are likely to be able to work on those next couple items. These planning sessions sound a lot like grooming and planning meetings in 1 from scrum. 
- Story points and t shirt size estimates focus on the relative size of work compared to other work items
- If you have a backlog of items that are the only things you work on, then an iteration-based approach (like scrum) would be suitable. If you, on the other hand, manage items that might come to you at any time (like support or maintenance), you might be better off with a flow-based approach, without the start and stop of iterations
- If you come from scrum and move to kanban, use the practices that make sense to you; keep having planning sessions to break down work, keep doing retrospectives and reviews if they work for you 
- In retrospective, ask everyone if they believe in the following statement: "Regardless of what we discover, we understand and truly believe that everyone did the best job they could, given what they knew at the time, their skills and abilities, the resources available, and the situation at hand." Ask the question: "if you could wave a magical wand and something would be different in the next retro, what would it be?"
- Kanban kata is repeating the same questions over and over again until they are muscle memory. The five questions: 1. What is the target condition? 2. What is the actual condition now? 3. What obstacles do you think are preventing you from reaching the target condition? Which one are you addressing now? 4. What is your next step and what do you expect? 5. When can we go and see what we have learned from taking that next step?  
- Cycle time refers to the time a work item takes to go through part of the process, while lead time refers to the time taken to finish the complete process. Throughput is the rate at which a system achieves its goal ( how much stuff we complete per time unit). 
- Statistical process control (SPC) is an approach to quality and consistency that marks the upper and lower bounds. You do this you need to do 4 things: 1. Get the average lead time over a specific period of time 2. One sigma (one standard deviation) value needs to be calculated across all your work items 3. Set the upper control limit to the average + 1 standard deviation 4. Set the lower control limit to the average - 1 standard deviation. Uses the statistical rule called the 68-95-99.7 rule,  which states that 68% of all values lie one standard deviation from the mean, 95% is within 2 standard deviations, and 99.7% within 3 standard deviations. 
- You get what you measure. This means you need to think about what you are measuring because people will often drive to improve those measurements. As with everything, there is likely to be a trade off when looking at 1 single metric. 
- You don't do kanban, you simply implement some of the ideas into the process that works for you. You should keep everything from scrum if it provides value to the team.
- Setting a WIP limit allows you three escalation levels: 1. Put it at the end of the backlog will take it when we get there. 2. Put it at the top of the backlog will take that next after finishing the things we’re doing right now. 3. Push it into the doing column at the cost of other work. Will drop whatever we’re doing now and do this instead.