# Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates
__By: Daniel H. Pink__
## Lessons Learned: 
- New concept of a low profit corporation. They do make some money, but their purpose is that they focus on social benefits, rather than profits
- Inherent tendency to seek out novelty and challenges, to extend and exercise their capacities, to explore, and to learn
- One of the reasons for anxiety and depression in the high attainers is that they are not having good relationships. They are busy making money and attending to themselves and that means that there is less room in their lives for love and attention and caring and empathy and the things that truly count
- Words are important. When talking to someone in the organization do they use “we” or “they” when they reference the company. This can really help you better understand their engagement with the company
- Rewards for behavior indicate that it is not a desirable task, why else would someone be paying for it. There is no coming back from giving a reward, the individual now expects the reward every time they do the task. They also might drive up the reward because the reward itself is just expected and know they need to do the task
- Goals that people set for themselves and that are devoted to attaining mastery are usually healthy. But goals imposed by can sometimes have dangerous side effects.
- Several studies on creative work and incentives by Teresa Amabile and Sam Glucksberg, both found that the more you reward, the poorer the creative performance. The reason being that the reward narrows our focus and clouds creative thinking
- If-then rewards require people to forfeit some of their autonomy. It drains an activity of its enjoyment. When institutions focus on the short term and opt for controlling people’s behavior, they do considerable long term damage. Try to encourage a kid to learn math by paying them for each page will almost certainly make the kid be more diligent in the short term and lose interest in the long term.
- The Sawyer Effect, the idea that something you don’t have to do or even pay to do is fun. On the other hand, something you have to do and get paid to do is work. This is regardless of the actual activity.
- Three laws to mastery. 1. Mastery is a mindset. You have to believe that you can get better at something and be willing to put in the time to learn. 2. Mastery is a pain. It isn’t easy to get better and there is a lot of mundane work that needs to be put in. Need to have grit to push through. 3. Mastery is an asymptote. You are always going to move towards mastery, but you can never actually reach it. You can always get better. Think of it like a logarithmic function
- Behavioral scientist often decide what we do on the job into two categories: algorithmic and heuristic. Algorithmic tasks are ones in which you follow an established set of instructions, assembly line worker. Heuristic is when there are no instructions and you need to experiment with possibilities and novel solutions, creating an ad campaign
- Flow. Where you are lost in some kind of work or task. The goals are clear and you can see progress towards that goal. The relationship between what a person has to do and what they could do was perfect, not too easy or too hard. People live deeply in the moment and felt in complete control.
- Billable hours are shit, can lead to unethical behavior, lead to unmotivated people, and focus on the input (piling up as many hours as possible) vs the output (solving a client's problem).
- Quote from William McKnight from 3M: "Hire good people, and leave them alone." The thought is that if you hire good people, they are going to want to do their jobs in their own way. 15% of 3M's technical staff's time can be spent on projects of their own choosing
- The 4 essentials of autonomy: task, time, technique, and team
- ROWE, results only work environment. The idea is that employees have unlimited freedom as long as they get their work done. Goals are set and worked towards, but are not connected with financial incentives. That creates a culture that is about the work, not all about the money
- Type I behavior is self-directed. I for intrinsic. It is devoted to becoming better and better at something that matters. It connects that quest for excellence to a larger purpose
- Deci and Ryan argue that we have three innate psychological needs: competence, autonomy, and relatedness
- If you give rewards for a creative work, make sure you only mention it once the work is complete
- Rewards can often reward short term thinking. Think about executives getting bonuses for quarterly earnings and ignoring investing in long term successor
- Giving children an allowance is good because it helps them think through how to handle cash, save, and spend. Chores are good because it shows them that families need to work together. Do not tie the two together, this leads children to think that the only reason they should do their chores is to get paid for it
- Try to determine the teams actual level of autonomy. Also ask them what the purpose of the organization is. Think about how we build an environment that promotes autonomy, mastery, and purpose
- Think about what road to mastery you are on and how you define your purpose based on that goal. Make sure you are taking small steps every day to get to mastery
- The science shows that the secret to high performance isn’t our biological drive or our reward and punishment drive, but our deep seated desire to direct our own lives, to extend and expand our abilities, and to live a life of purpose
- Think about you goals wisely. Money may not be the best goal because you will always want more of it. Think about how you can help others and set goals around that
- Three parts of an organization that contribute to purpose: 1. Goals (what are the objectives of the company. Are they just financial or do they try to give back and make the world a better place) 2. Words (what words does the company use. Do they use efficiency or profit, or impact and love) 3. Policies (what policies are put in place to reach these objectives)