# The Passionate Programmer: Creating a Remarkable Career in Software Development
__By: Chad Fowler__
## Lessons Learned:
- If you want to stay relevant, you’re going to have to dive into the domain of the business you’re in.
- You should put the same level of care into selecting which industry to serve as you put into selecting which technologies to master.
- We were more likely to extend offers to candidates with diverse (and even unorthodox) experience than to those whose experiences were homogenous. My explanation is that either good people seek out diversity, because they love to learn new things, or being forced into alien experiences and environments created more mature, well-rounded software developers.
- You don’t have to become an expert. Work through enough code that you truly feel the difference in the new programming environment. If it doesn’t feel strange enough, either you’ve picked the wrong language or you’re applying your old way of thinking to the new language. Go out of your way to learn the idioms of the new language.
- Take calculated risks with your career. Don’t let fear consume you. And if you’re not having fun, you’re not going to be excellent.
- Find an opportunity—at work or outside—to teach a class on some aspect of a technology that you would like to develop some depth in. As you’ll see in , teaching is one of the best ways to learn.
- It might be a technology or business domain that gets you excited. Or, on the other hand, it might be a specific technology or business domain that drags you down. Or a type of organization. Maybe you’re meant for small teams or big teams. Or rigid processes. Or agile processes. Whatever the mix, take some time to find yours.
- How and why?—Either as you sit here reading or the next time you’re at work, think about the facets of your job that you may not fully understand. You can ask yourself two extremely useful questions about any given area to drill down into the murky layers: How does it work? and Why does this (have to) happen? You may not even be able to answer the questions, but the act of asking them will put you in a new frame of mind and will generate a higher level of awareness about your work environment.
    - What about the dusty corners of your primary programming language that you rarely visit?
    - Try truly digging into, for example, the way multithreaded programming works in your chosen programming environment. Or, how about stream libraries, network programming APIs, or even the set of utilities available for dealing with collections or lists?
- TopCoder offers a practice room with a large collection of practice problems that you can use as excellent fodder for your practice sessions.
- Kata, which are small, thought-provoking exercises that programmers can do in the language of their choice. Each kata emphasizes a specific technique or thought process, providing a concrete flexing of one’s mental muscles.
- Pick a project, and read it like a book. Make notes. Outline the good and the bad. Write a critique, and publish it. Find at least one trick or pattern that you can use from it. Find at least one bad thing that you observed that you will add to your “What not to do” checklist when you’re developing software.
- Pick a task you normally do repetitively, and write a code generator for it. Start simple. Don’t worry about reusability. Just make sure your generator saves you time.
- The lesson here is that if you ever need to get in touch with a venture capitalist, work hard on getting a warm referral since it is the best way to get one’s foot in the door. I have compiled this list and am sharing the questions with you in case you ever need to raise money from VCs in the future; see http://www.enterprisecorp.com/resources/assessment.htm).
- for your next project or a system you maintain, start making some notes about what you think your users and managers are going to ask for. Be creative. Try to see the system from their points of view.
- Without warning his manager, he started tracking daily hits. His goal was to, each day, have some kind of outstanding accomplishment to report to his manager—some idea he had thought of or implemented that would make his department better
- Casting off the daily drive to succeed may sound like an ascetic, unattainable goal. You’ll find that it’s very pragmatic, though. Focusing on the present allows you to enjoy the small victories of daily work life: the feeling of a job well done.
- you should never get too comfortable. He professed to waking up every day and intentionally and explicitly reminding himself that he could be knocked off of his pedestal any day. Today could be it, he’d say.
- When you have too much time to work, your work time reduces significantly in perceived value. If you have seventy hours available, each hour is less precious to you than when you have forty hours available.
- you are always going to be measured based on someone else’s perception of you. Your potential promotions or salary increases—even the decision of whether you should continue to be on the payroll at all—is completely dependent on the perceptions of others.
- Pick one of your favorite pieces of software and e-mail its creator. Start by thanking him or her for the software. Then make a suggestion, ask a question, or make some other attempt at establishing a human connection with them. Solicit a response of some sort.
- If this is the core of your work life—the actual work—then you’ve already arrived at your destination. The goal-oriented, destination-focused thinking that you usually do leads only from one goal to the next. It has no logical end. What most of us fail to realize is that the path is the end.
- __Value rigidity__ is what happens when you believe in the value of something so strongly that you can no longer objectively question it.